[MUSIC] Hello and welcome back to Theory and
Practice of Data Cleaning. This week we will get started with the
relational model and relational queries. Last week we learned about data
normalization using OpenRefine. This pattern based approach allows us
to clean individual data columns and generate canonical representations of data
which is a prerequisite for all subsequent steps, with this logic based data cleaning
we study this week and data analysis. So now that we know how to fix some
technical issues arising in individual columns, it is time to study how we
can deal with logical constraints that span multiple columns and
multiple data tables. In this week we will therefore talk
about the relational model and give a brief introduction
to relational databases. If you have already worked with such
data bases this may just be a refresher. But one which may in the end make you
appreciate even more the power that comes with relational queries in particular for
checking logical data integrity. We will look at key notions such
as the Relational Model itself and various associated notions, that is relational schemas describing
the structure of data, database instances, that is the actual content in
the database tables, and query languages. In particular using a simple
example I will show how rather different looking relational query
languages share many commonalities and have in fact a common core in
first order predicate logic. After having worked through this weeks
materials, you should be able to recognize queries in different languages
in particular data log and SQL. And see the common
underlying logical core. In the assignment, you'll will practice how to write simple
relation queries in data log, and how to express logical integrity constraints as
data log queries in so-called denial form. Learning a bit of Datalog allows you to
see more directly the underlying logic patterns use to express and
check relational data integrity. In future lectures we will then also go
more mainstream by employing SQL queries for similar queries and
integrity constraint checks. While highly relevant in practice, SQL sometimes obscures the underlying
logical kernel of queries and integrity constraints which is
why we look at Datalog first. Okay, let's jump right
into the first lecture. [MUSIC]