[MUSIC] Hello and welcome to week two of
Theory and Practice of Data Cleaning. Last week, I gave a general overview of
data cleaning, data quality dimensions and topics and
tools to be covered in this course. This week,
we will already get our hands dirty. Maybe not surprising if you
want to clean dirty data. And we do this by learning about and
then exercising an approach for recognizing syntactic patterns and
data quality issues. Specifically this week we'll
learn about regular expressions. First by looking at the roots of
regular expressions in theoretical computer science. But then, also by learning about
the practical aspects of using real world regular expressions. These regular expressions are found
in modern programming and scripting languages, text editors and
even special tools such as open refine for data cleaning. And they do differ quite a bit from
the theoretical regular expressions, studied in computer science theory. After you've worked through this week's
material, you should be able to understand how regular expressions and
regular languages fit in a larger theoretical framework of formal
languages studied in computer science. But then from a practical point of view,
you should be able to apply real world regular expressions to match certain
patterns in order to determine whether a data string corresponds
to a standard format or not. Say for example the ISo date format. Having even a basic understanding in some
practical skills of regular expressions go a very long way to what's more
effectively working with data, whether just doing the initial data
extraction phase or the matching, checking, and
transformation of data at the later stage. Regular expression skills can be
applied in general scripting and programming languages, ranging from R and
Python to Java, to name a few. Even when using specialized tools,
for example, OpenRefine for data cleaning,
regular expressions will come very handy. At the end of this week the hands
on assignment will await you to test your understanding
of regular expressions. In particular, in the first hands-on assignment, we'll
have to come up with regular expressions that match certain data formats for
example, for dates or email addresses. It will be important and
can sometimes be a bit tricky to come up with regular expressions that
match the desired positive examples. But do not match the undesired
negative examples. I will point you to an online website that
allows you to experiment with regular expressions easily and interactively. Okay, let's jump right into the first
lecture on regular expressions. [MUSIC] [SOUND]