[MUSIC] [SOUND] Let's just go back
quickly to our toy example, with the geo-taxonomies before. So let me show this one more time. So again, we can look at a map like
this and think of it as taxonomy. In this case,
splitting the US up into five regions, or splitting it up into four regions. In this case, one particular point of
contention is, is DC in the Northeast or is it in the South? The answer is yes,
depending on who you ask. It's yes in both cases. You can overlay this with PowerPoint,
which is not so ideal, but you see already what emerges. There's something that
was called the South, but the other guy calls it the Southwest and
the Southeast. And that big West is actually
cut up in the other, right? That big West is actually smaller here, that West is smaller because
there's a Southwest. Or you can overlap it properly with a GIS,
which I did here. And then you get these new regions. And now the question is,
okay how can we compute this? In the case of a GIS, we can use GIS. But what do we do in
the case of the insects? Or the birds or
your vocabulary that you have if you cross walk some subject color works say
as a [INAUDIBLE] expression for example. Now this particular example
can actually be resolved on automatically which is nice. We could try to solve the problem
here at the level of the regions. We could have a mini taxonomy that
has five children and one route. Or four children, four regions,
and one route for the US. Or we say, you know what? Let's not do that. Let's just go to the level
of the states and we can automatic alignment
because we know the states match. And get that. So I'm going to show
that in a little demo. So here is everything in one slide. Here at the regional level, so
here we don't use the states. I'm going to show this in
a moment with the states. If you don't use the states, you can have
two small taxonomies corresponding to senses and NDC vocabularies,
four, five regions. The next thing you would do is say,
okay, let's put some articulations. Where do you get those
input articulations from? First of all,
what is the language of articulations? I didn't quite specify that. What can you say? There's exactly five things you can say
in this language, is also called RCC5, the reach and connection calculus
based on five base relations. The five basic relations are,
let's see which ones. Maybe, we can find them here. First is equality. We can claim that this Midwest is
exactly the same as that Midwest. If you look at the map, sort of visually,
so this Midwest and that Midwest, they look pretty much the same. Don't they? So, as an expert we might look at this and
say well the Midwest is the same. Now let's look at something else. What about the west here and
the west there? So, there's two West worlds. The West world according
to NDC which is smaller than the west according to the CEN region. So we make another articulation
with the subset relationship here. This is our Blueman's version of subset,
less than here. And so, we find equality,
containment in one direction or the other. That gives us three relationships. Then, there's this funny
thing called overlapse. We write it like this funny symbol,
overlapse. Looks a little bit like a joint or
a cross, for multiplication. So for example, the claim here that we're
making input that we say that the west overlaps with the southwest. The west overlaps with the southwest. That's true because
look at this part here. This part certainly is in
the west over here and this is in the southwest over here. So there must be some states or some parts of the country that are both
in the southwest, if you ask this people. And not in the west mind you, so
then the southwest but not in the west. But if you ask these people they say,
yes they are in the west. That's the conflict,
that's the disagreement. But we can sort this out by saying well,
there's this overlaps. So five relations, equality,
inclusion in one direction or the other. This makes three. Overlaps makes four, and also the fifth, relation, disjointness,
nothing to do with one another. So sometimes we might want to say, for
example, the west of the census region here, the west of this here, is completely
disjoint from the northeast over here. So disjointness is, of course, something
that you typically don't want to say. Isn't it obvious? But, of course,
If you don't put that assertion there, the system can generate
alternative possible worlds. Where in fact the west and
the northeast overlap. So in this particular case, you need to just state all the things
that are convenient for you to discover. And state them all. And state them hopefully correctly. And then the system will
come up with a solution. And this solution here, down here. Basically, corresponds to
a symbolic representation of what the GIS system does
when you overlay the maps. And I'm going to show
this in a actual demo. Again, one more time, here's the input. If you solve this, there's two ways. We have these tool that we call
Euler because the diagrams, its drawing, these trees. Can be thought of as another notation for
Euler diagram. With a Euler diagram, named after
Leonard Euler, the mathematician. The Euler diagrams are kind of
earlier versions of vin diagrams, and actually they more directly represent
the relationship between sets. In vin diagrams if you look at
how different sets overlap you know that you need to shade some parts and
color and un-color some parts. In the Euler diagram if a set
is the subset of the other. You don't throw out the normal
ovals that overlay and then shade some parts as empty. You just put that smaller
set inside of the other set. That's the Euler diagram. And we have sort of a tree
notation of that, and that's why we call this the tool that
computes that Euler, the Euler tool. So if you give this input, you get one
solution which is of the simple solution that says well, the west, this west
is properly contained in that west. So, the NDC's west is strictly
smaller than the CEN's West. And CEN'S northeast is strictly
smaller than the NDC northeast. So you see some concept it goes like this,
some concept it goes like that, that's a really example, that's really,
the southeast is containing the south. But then there's seas overlap relation. Some of this you have set as an input. So for example, already the input you
said that the southwest is part of, overlaps with the west. Excuse me, some part of the west. So, they're really overlapping in a way
that all three parts of the overlap exist. There are things about west but
now southwest. There are things about Southwest but
not west. And there are things about both west and southwest in these
different terminologies. But there's also overlaps that we're
not given as part of the input, they were inferred. The reason is not, okay, given all
of what I know, this must overlap. Now if you want to look closer,
you want to zoom in. When I put the, more of a magnification
of high resolution conceptually, you can now resolve these overlaps as boolean
combinations basically of what's going on. For example, you could say, all right,
you're telling me that the northeast and the south overlap? So how is that the northeast and
the south overlap? So this is a child and that's child. Well, the overlap, what does it mean? They have must common descendants,
its would be a like family example. They must have common descendants. So, the northeast and
the south have a common child or grandchild depending
on how you look at it. Which is called the intersection
of the northeast and the south. Sends the south intersect
with the NDC northeast. This particular area is the one
that has the half smokes because that's the one that is both
in the south and in the northeast. So the times here is an end
a little bit like [INAUDIBLE]. It's an end so the region is both
in the northeast and in the south. So although we haven't put on any state so
we could fuzzify that map. It tells us everything symbolically we are
not at the resolution of the states yet. However, we can already talked
about the parts where the concepts overlap one minus the other and so on. So for example this notation means, we talking here the part of
the south that is not the southwest. What CENs is close this out which
is not the southwest of NDC. Lots of good stuff going on there. So, I've put this
solution here on the map. So, this is what the tool gives
us,this is what GIS gives us. And because I picked the geographic
example I can see the correspondence right directly. So everybody agrees on the midwest, because the midwest is kind of identical,
by definition. So we can't make it gray. Over here, this region with the hash
marks is the intersection of Northeast and South. So if you look very carefully
here where the red dot is, you see it's part of this south, but
it's also part of this northeast. And if you intersected them in GIS, you get a little patch that's barely
visible here, has a bunch of states here. And so depending also the colour
coding was really carefully chosen, we want to reuse the vocabulary
that we already know. So if you see a green term,
it's an NDC terminology, coming from that one taxonomy. If its yellow,
it's from the other terminology. If it's grey, it's like it's in both. Don't worry, we're all in the clear here. But if it's reddish,
it means something new going on. We did not have a word for this thing. We did not have a word for
this little patch of R2. Well what is it? How is it defined? Maybe we could give it a name. Well, we could call it the NDC Southwest
intersected with the census West. Maybe you want to give it a new name,
but that's what it is logically. It has actually a synonym, you could also call it,
the NDC Southwest minus the census South. That's exactly the same thing. That's a logical consequence of your
input, your input alignment, previously. So whether you like it or not,
that's a consequence of your assumptions. Similar down here,
well the Southeast, for example, we don't need a new name for that. So you see, we can mix the Census
Northeast and the NDC Southeast. No controversy, we can all agree. But up here we disagree. It's part of the NDC Northeast or
the Census South, depending on you ask. So we need to give this a new name,
a new label. That's how we sort out
our vocabulary conflict. So in this merged taxonomy we have
the old names whenever we can. Let's say for example old and
new, let's just say for the sake of argument that CEN was the old
taxonomy and NDC was the new taxonomy. So we can have the new
name where it applies. We can keep the old name where it applies. With also some agreement where the old and
the new name is the same. And then we have regions
where the old name nor the new name, neither census
where not everything will fit. And we have to make up new names, based
on intersections or set difference or something of these old names. And that's what this gives us. So I think I showed you
all of that all ready. And now I'm going to show
this with a little demo. I'm going to show this live, okay? So first, let's look how would I
encode and input like the one we have. In this tool,
I write the taxonomy like this. I say, here is the taxonomy CEN census. Here's the NDC taxonomy. And I write just the parent note
as the first note in the list and then the children are below. So for example, according to the census,
the US consists of the Northeast, the Midwest, South and the West. So there are four children of the USA. For NDC there are five, something called
the Midwest, the Northeast, the Southeast, the Southwest and the West, is that five? And then somebody must have given
me this input articulations, these are the stitching together. But there are consequences of this
stitching together in this taxonomy. That's what the tool computes. So we say, well, the USA is the same. This west includes other west,
this one overlaps this one and so on. So how do I run this? Let's see where I can run this. The tool is called Euler or
this euler2 align, I just say align CEN-NDC
at the regions level. We're going to do in
a moment At the state level, which would also be very interesting. But let's just say we do at
the recent regions level. So it's a small taxonomy. We run this. And we get a possible solution, other
solution, is maybe not very easy to read. But this has basically computed
the relationships that are logical consequences of the input. Let's just show these visually. So I can say show the input visualization,
the original taxonomy view. And let's look at the possible world. So the tool has create these, has
created in a subfolder, these products. Okay.
So here are the products. The input is our original input
text file that we just had. That was the input. And it creates a copy for good providence,
you know, record keeping purposes. But there's now also a visualization
of the original taxonomies. So those are the original taxonomies. We see that's, yeah. The USA split into four or five regions,
with think of this edges as relationships, okay, that's good. But then we also have the input alignment,
so how does that look like? So, this our input alignment. So, some expert or maybe by looking at
the map, we've got this pink connections. But we still don't know all
the consequences, how everything relates. But the tool has computed this for us and it put it in a folder,
a product called PWs, possible worlds. This case is exactly one possible
world which comes in different forms whether it's a PDF file, or
a graphics file, or a YAML file. So here's the possible world
hears a single possible world. In a way put everything together,
this isn't overly impressive right now. Because in a way we give a lot of the
input already by the initial alignments. But we know some connections
we can see some overlaps but they were probably part of the input. It also haven't resolved things,
it hasn't introduced new vocabulary, it just says, the West and
the Southwest overlap. And the Southwest and the South overlap. And the Northeast and the South overlap
from the different vocabularies. But how do they overlap exactly. We don't know from this. So what we can do is we run the tool
again with the sort of zoom in option. So just like I ran the tool before,
I said align these things. I can now To a particular
evaluation option called MNCB. This means combined concepts. It's trying to increase the conceptual
resolution by sorting out the overlaps. It's sorting out the overlaps. Bigger answer, [LAUGH] but still a single
possible world, the possible world. Beware of the consequences. So now we're going to show this solution. And to keep it neat, we say hide overlaps. Okay, so we look at the possible
world is just now being created. So, you see this now as new folder,
just a few minutes later. And here we go to the possible world. This is just now created. And I open it and now we get this. And this should look familiar
you've seen this before. Now, this is sorted out with everything. It tells us now that the southeast
is contained in the region that is the south minus the southwest and
also minus the northeast. So it has this higher resolution
where's the half smokes that's CEN south into Sec south NDC northeast. Now, how do I know that's half smokes? What can I do? Of course, I can often in reality
I can just go in my vocabulary to find a grand level maybe
to individuals level. If I don't know what the concept
stand maybe I can enumerate it. I can [INAUDIBLE] sample it and that
going to be the last part of the demo. Now we're going to go one level down, and get a fully automatic alignment,
that way which is really neat. [MUSIC] [SOUND]