[MUSIC] Let's have a look at how we're working
with OpenRefine with a farmer's market dataset. So first we're going to select
the tab here called Create Project. And then hopefully we've by this time
downloaded the dataset from the farmer's market website from the USDA. And it is now here on the desktop, you see
here it's been saved as a file Export.csv. So we now can say Create Project,
Choose File, and we go to the file Export.csv. And say Open and hit the Next button. At this point OpenRefine will try to
import the data and giving us a preview. There are also some parsing
options that we can select here. For example, do we think this
a common separate values file, or is it a tab separated values file. Clearly, we see that the tab
separated didn't quite work out. So, the default that OpenRefine
gives us here is the one that seems to worked quite well. So it seems like all the columns
have been recognized. And all of these other defaults
seem to be working fine. Let's give this a better project name, call it Farmers-Markets, and
then we hit Create Project. And that was fairly easy, we see now that the Farmers-Markets
project has been created. It has 8,664 rows, and
now we can begin exploring the dataset, profiling it, looking at the data,
and maybe also cleaning the data. For starters, let's have a look
at the Market Name column. So one of the main functions
that you want to do is, if you want to look at the data in the
column, you select the little triangle. Then look at different options here, in
this case, we were looking at facets, and we're looking in particular
at the text facet. You select that, OpenRefine will notice that,
in this particular column market name, there are 8,095 different values
out of the 8,664 rows overall. So some of these values
must appear multiple times, to see which ones they are, we click
on the count button, which will sort it in a way that the highest occurrences
come first so in descending order. So we see for example El Mercado Familiar
request 33 times as a name of a farmer's market, probably
different markets in different places. Main Street Farmer's market seems
to be a popular name as well, and this is all nice and good. Now let's use one of the really powerful
functions here called clustering and this facet again focus our
attention on the market name. And hitting Cluster will make
OpenRefine cluster the different values into groups that seem to
indicate that maybe a single value should be used where different values
where different values actually appear. So if you look for
example here at Irvington Farmers Market, you see there are four
different spellings, although these four different spellings
are not obviously all different. So there might be invisible
white space characters and similar things going on here. So what we can do now we can say
we select to merge these cells with different values
across these various cells. And we can now put the spelling
that we prefer to be used for all these different cells here. If you're really brave,
we might want to say, okay, all of these clusters look pretty good. It seems that OpenRefine has really found all the right values that need to
be group together and normalized. And we also should check
on the right hand side, that we like to name that spelled there. For example here WARSAW FARMERS MARKET
in all upper case, maybe that's not necessarily the one we want, maybe we
want to use the regular spelling like so. Once we've reviewed all of them and
think this is looking good, we can select all of them for
a final merge operation. And then OpenRefine will normalize all of these values to be replacing them
by the value on the right here. In this particular case there's no
further clusters to be found so in other settings where you have more
messy data what might happen is that you have to repeat the step a couple of times. So we now notice that there are, out of these 8,664 rows there are now
only 7,846 different choices. So several more names
have been normalized and grouped together just like we intended for
example Irvington Farmers Market is now a group of five and
all spelled the same way. So what are other things we can
do here to explore the dataset? For example, we might wanma look,
here we see an x and a y value. Those values look a little bit as
if they were maybe longitude and latitude, the coordinates
of the farmers market. So let's have a look at that, what we should do first though is
these are right now still strings. And we need to convert to
string into numeric values and then we can look at other facets. So first we're going to
do an edit of the cell, we use a common transform
in this case to number. So we convert this to numbers, and
we see 8,635 cells have been converted. So there's still a couple of cells
missing, but we'll worry about them later. Again, Edit cells, Common transforms, and we're going to transform this
column now also to numeric value. And we also see 8,635 cells have been
now converted to numeric values, so, this is very nice and now we can used
a powerful facet called scatterplot. If we go to Facet, Scatterplot facet,
we now see an overview of the x and y values of all the records,
and we see here that this nicely confirms here the shape
of the continental US. There seem to also be
some other data points, which at first sight might look like
they might be outliers or errors. But we can confirm that later to see
whether this is indeed a problem or whether these data points are in
effect maybe lying on an island here, possibly Hawaii, or maybe up here,
this could be Alaska. Alright, so we've created that,
let's look at another facet. And the very last one, let's look at whether there are some
columns that look like they are dates. And we see here in the last
column updateTime is a column that seems to have dates in it, so
maybe what we can do here is we convert this also as a common transform and
convert this to date, this column. And then we notice that about 500 cells
have been missed, but many of them, 8,131 have in fact been
converted to a date. And now that this has been done, we can now create another facet,
a timeline facet. The timeline facet gives us an overview,
as you see here on the left, of what times show up in this column, and we can also slide here these
little sliders and get an idea. If you want to sort of focus in there
seems to be a little peak here. So a lot of data maybe
was changed here in 2010. Another thing we notice here that some
rows are missing data for the products here that are sold in the farmer's market,
wine, coffee, beans, fruits, and so on. So by playing here with
the sliders we can see how our data looks like
across the different time. Okay, so this is all for this initial demonstration of OpenRefine
with the farmers market data. [MUSIC]