So what I'm gonna show you now is how we can deal with recursion in SQL using some small examples, hands-on examples. We're gonna post those examples also on the website. So, since 1999 or since rather that standard called SQL:99, recursion is now allowed in SQL using a construct called CTE (common table expressions). So the basic idea is you write a statement such as this, you say: with recursive. So that with recursive, that special construct, and then you have a query. We're gonna look at that in a moment with some examples. And this will allow us to do is to, for example, navigate a simple hierarchy and do some operations on it. There's also some crazy stuff we can do with recursion. This is, again, basically having fun with ASCII art here. So this is, I think, one of the examples of the SQLite on the website, somewhere it's mentioned there. There is a mathematical field called fractals or fractal geometry that became popular or was pioneered by this fellow here, Benoit Mandelbrot, in the 80s, in the 1980s. And you see down here sort of different views as you zoom into this very, you know, highly recursive and self-similar mathematical object. So this is something that's related to chaos theory, has nothing really to do with data cleaning here, but it's an example of something that sort of you can study using a computers by sort of zooming in and looking at properties. This is also used – fractal geometry, for example, also used in rendering. You know, if you see computer animated movies where you see scenes of landscapes and mountains and so on, these kinds of techniques are often used. So here is a proof of concept. You can see that you can get sort of an approximation of that set using SQL. This is kind of neat. So you can write a query that is recursive and gives you, you know, this output. So you see this Mandelbrot set here on the left is the big overview and here we zoom in at ever and ever greater resolutions, zooming in a factor of a thousand, 10,000, a million. You can zoom in very far and then a sort of an interesting or neat property of these fractals is often that, often not necessarily, but often that they're self-similar So you started out here and you zoom in further, further, further, and then inside, you see something that looks just like what you started with or very similar. OK? So again, this is something we'll play with in a moment. We'll do this in SQL just to see how it works.